BI Norwegian Business School - campus Oslo
GRA 22371
Counselling
Component of continuous assessment: Term paper
Term paper – Counts 70% of total grade
ID number: 1000208
Start: 20.04.2018 09.00
Finish: 08.06.2018 12.00
No. 10
Table of content
Summary ................................................................................................................................... 2
Item 1 ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Item 2 ........................................................................................................................................ 7
Item 3 ...................................................................................................................................... 12
Reference list .......................................................................................................................... 16
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Summary
Counselling is about talking, and our conversations can be understood as
games. We play games that have rules that define the frame of interaction. So,
what happens when no one says anything? Depending on the game we play,
silence means different things, but the general idea is that silence conveys as
much, if not more information in an interaction. From this Gregory Bateson stated
that you simply cannot not communicate, meaning that all verbal and non-verbal
communication signals something in the communication games we play.
Elaborating on the games we play in the spheres of therapy, the games
between a counselor and her client can shift quickly as the session progress. The
psychoanalytical tradition points to transference, resistance and interpretation as
important tools, events and experiences that happens in a therapeutic relationship.
These experiences can shift the game and change the rules of the game.
People have different reasons for going into a counselling session, but in
today’s time, behavioral issues related to anxiety and depression are at the top of
the list. In the cognitive behavioral field, there is a conception that these kinds of
issues have been taught and can be un-learned using the same learning principles
as when they were taught. Social anxiety is learned by negative feedback from the
client’s surroundings and can be reversed by giving positive feedback from
within. Either using exposure therapy or teaching relaxation techniques to get the
body to realize that the anxiety is maladaptive. From this we learn that life is
really just a matter of training the body and mind that anxiety is not justifiable.
But what happens when we have a body of young professionals who are
suffering from variety of behavioral issues, and are just about to enter work life?
Millennials, as they are often called is the generation that has been pointed out to
have the highest incident of anxiety and depression among other generations. This
is a problem that will have consequences for organizations, but who is responsible
for these issues? Is it the government, the companies or the individual? This
question is the topic of item 3.
It however starts with the discussion of what happens when you put
Gregory Bateson’s philosophy into the context of the psychoanalytical approach,
continues to discuss how individuals have “learned” their behavioral issues and
how they un-learn it. Lastly, I reflect on some of the questions that I thought of
while taking the class.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Item 1
How can we understand Gregory Bateson’s phrase “you cannot not
communicate”? How does this relate to concepts from other theories used in
counseling, such as “transference”, “resistance”, or “hypnotic report”? You may
discuss these concepts or pick other phenomena from the literature that you think
are interesting.
We communicate with the people we meet every day. We communicate
with our loved ones, our friends, and even strangers on a daily basis. This to be
understood and send a message. A message that we would like to do something,
but, sometimes we do not intend to send one. We just want to be. But according to
Bateson, this is not possible. Finding oneself in a situation where there are people
around, communication is inevitable. We find ourselves in games where silence is
still understood as communication. Throughout this assignment I will look at how
the communication games we play can change in a therapy session as a function
of different psychoanalytical concepts such as: transference, resistance, and
interpretation. Because these concepts are closely linked, the choice was taken to
look at interpretation and not hypnotic report.
“You cannot not communicate”. There is no anti-behavior and even
silence conveys some form of information (Watzlawick, Bavelas, & Jackson,
1967). This notion reflects the fact that once you have entered into the space of
others, even slight movements or just silence and a stiff face conveys and signals
something. Consider the situation in which you have had a quarrel with a casual
friend. This friend’s birthday is coming up and you notice that other people in
your friend circle are being invited but you are not. Even the action of not being
invited is your casual friend letting you know that he/she does not want to interact
with you. This information about how the communication should be interpreted, is
what Bateson called metacommunication (Littlejohn & Foss, 2009).
Conversations carries two types of information. The content of the
message, and the metacommunication. The metacommunication constitutes the
cues and the actions that surround the conversations. It is what gives meaning to
the words and put it into context. Take the example of the statement: “I hate you”.
If this statement is communicated with an aggressive tone, it is something entirely
different than if it was communicated in a playful manner with a teasing frame
(Littlejohn & Foss, 2009).
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Bateson was interested in the games we play. He wanted to examine the
interactions that we are part of in our everyday life. He believed that when people
where interacting with each other, their interactions, their communication exists in
a frame, limiting the free flow of communication. These limits create games. The
games we play set the tone for what is “allowed” to say or do and what should not
be said in a relation. One example of a game is the true love game that we
discussed in class. Between two lovers there should be mutual and voluntary love.
In this game, there are rules that should not be broken. Such rules could be: not to
engage in love affairs with other people and respect your lover. These rules
govern the love game, and they limit and influence what is said and done in the
relationship. Breaking the rules to this game could be being unfaithful and would
have a social consequence for both the person who was unfaithful and the other in
some cases too.
According to Bateson, we play these games in every encounter. The rules
of the games limit us and places restrictions on our actions. We do not talk about
these rules, but they are deeply embedded in our exchanges. Between a counsellor
and the client there is also a game. The rules of this game are specific to the
situation, but generally the rules are that the client is allowed to speak about
anything they want and need to, and the counsellor is not supposed to judge the
client and create the openness in the session. However, sometimes these rules are
broken or changed. The game shifts and new game arises with a new set of rules.
We can see this is relation to the concepts of transference, resistance, and
interpretation. Concepts that are usually adopted by the psychoanalytical tradition.
Transference is the way in which people transfer feelings from one
relationship to another. Transference is the redirection of feelings of all kinds
from an earlier experience into a new experience. One could for example transfer
feelings from one’s parents to one’ partner or children. This could also happen if a
person has had a bad relationship with an ex-spouse and meets someone with the
same posture and resembling voice. Feelings of anxiety or anger could then be
transferred onto the new acquaintance. In a counselling situation, the transfer
traditionally happens from one relationship the client has on to the counsellor. In
the psychoanalytical field, transference comes with several advantages such as the
client’s weak ego which makes the counsellor able to access the client’s superego.
But transference can also become hostile and negative, ultimately harming the
progress of therapy.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Transference is changing the game. We can understand this as a way of
escaping the client-counsellor/patient-therapist game, to enter an old game the
client is comfortable with. This could be if the client is not comfortable with
talking about the feelings associated with why that person is in therapy. They can
then try to enter the new game because they need to feel comfort of a mother and
transfer those feelings onto the counsellor. And when the client changes the game,
he/she changes the rules in line with that game. The game between the counsellor
and the client is defined by the rules: the client is allowed to say whatever he or
she wants and come forward with the problems, and the counsellor is then to
respond in an understanding matter. The counsellor should not share with the
clients his or her own issues, and so on. These rules are often defined by the
counsellor’s authority.
When the client changes the game and transfers the feelings of for
example the love a child has for his mother, the rules change. Suddenly, there is a
shift in what is allowed to say and do defined by the rules. A mother-daughter
relationship is entirely different from a counsellor-client game. This new game is
featured as a caring and nurturing game, if the client has positive memories of his
mother of course. This not only happens if clients transfer feelings onto the
counsellor, but countertransference can also arise as counsellors can transfer
feelings onto the client. Then the counsellor is changing the game, and the rules.
One can see this change of the rules, but to a lesser extent in resistance.
Freud defined resistance as: “all forces that oppose the work of recovery”
(Colledge, 2002, pg. 22). Often, resistance resides with the client and can come up
when talking generally, but also with a specific topic. This could happen when
talking about the father of the client for example. The client may have a very
difficult and anxiety-driven relationship with his father. In the counselling
session, the client may be unwilling to talk about his father and may change the
subject.
It could be interpreted that resistance changes the rules of the counsellorclient
relationship by limiting what can be said and not said. And although the
counsellor knows they need to dig in to it, this response to a touchy subject like a
father-son relationship plagued by violence and abuse, sets the tone, and changes
the rules for the therapeutic relationship. There may not be a shift in what game is
played, but the rules change.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
In line with these psychoanalytic concepts we can see how interpretation
can also function as a game changer in a therapeutic setting. Interpretation is an
act where the counsellor brings unconscious thoughts and feelings into the
conscious mind. These feelings are not understood by the client, thus, the
interpretation by the counsellor is needed to understand the different thoughts the
client has. Interpretation in my view could alter the game, but it could also not
affect the game at all. Also, it doesn’t depend on whether the counsellor is right or
not.
If one takes the example of someone who has been physically abused by
their father. There may some transference of the feelings, directed at the
counsellor, and the client may be resisting to tell about the incidents where the
father acted abusive. If the counsellor says that their current feelings has
something to do with the abusive relationship with their father, they may direct
anger towards the counsellor, or it could be relief to the client. Whatever the client
results in acting, it could change the rules by opening up a discussion that the
client earlier didn’t feel they were able to have. It could also result in changing the
game by enabling the client to have outbursts directed at the counsellor in a
cursing and psychological abusive manner. This because the client feels like the
counsellor has overstepped some boundary, and now the client is allowed to do
the same.
All these forces serve to change the rules of the game and even a shift in
what game you play can happen. These are forces that the counsellor should be
aware of but not necessarily try to hinder happening. Some of these things forces
are undetectable too, however, talking about talking, which is what Bateson called
metacommunication should take place within a therapeutic setting, and would
probably benefit the client. Ultimately, clients going through transference,
resistance, and interpretation are playing the communication game of Bateson,
and they are changing.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Item 2
To which extent is life a matter of training? Discuss how behavioral problems
related to performance, well-being and relationships can be diagnosed and treated
in terms of learning mechanisms.
According to the behaviorist movements in psychology all behaviors in
humans are results of learning mechanisms. The behaviorist tradition stood at its
inception as opposed to the “introspective and subjective” psychology, at the time
called “old psychology”. Behaviorists saw learning as a deep-rooted mechanism
in all humans and animals. They believed that behavioral issues such as anxiety
disorders could be understood as learned behavior and maladaptive coping
mechanisms. They also believed that unlearning the learned behavior was the only
way to stop the psychological issues. Life is therefore a matter of training as
training in this case refers to learning new behavior and unlearning the coping
mechanisms that created abnormal adaptation.
Learning theory
To understand how behavioral problems can be diagnosed and treated by
training and learning mechanisms, we must first understand how the initial
maladaptive responses are learned. Most people view learning as something
students do in class-rooms. However, to psychologists, learning constitutes more,
and is usually said to be pioneered by Ivan Pavlov. Pavlov showed how dogs can
be learned a response to a specific stimulus. He gave the dog food, while
presenting it with a stimulus (a metronome) and measured the dogs’ salivary
response. Eventually, after this trial had been repeated a couple of times, the dog
started salivating after the stimulus was presented, even when food wasn’t
present. This had then become a learned, a conditioned response. The dog started
associating the sound of the bell with food, and the mere sound of the bell started
a salivary response. Another example of Pavlov’s classical conditioning in
humans is when a child is to be given a shot at the doctors, and the doctor
reassures the child that it won’t hurt. However, when the needle hurts the child,
the child could be conditioned to fear the doctor.
While Pavlov’s work presented the theory of classical condition where
behavior is controlled by what happened before, Skinner believed that “only the
probability of a similar response happening in the future can be predicted”
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
(Colledge, 2002, pg.193). This is what Skinner called operant conditioning and is
based on the way in which the environment produces consequences or
reinforcements for behaviors. According to the theory of operant conditioning, the
consequences or reinforcement can be either negative or positive, in that negative
reinforcements is the removal of something unpleasant, and positive is the
presentation of something pleasant. Shaping and maintaining behavior can be
understood by studying the characteristics of these reinforcements.
Non-intermittent schedules of reinforcement are the continuous
reinforcement of the response, and often subject to extinction if the consequence
or reinforcer is not present when the response is, after some trials. This happens if
there is a learned response, for example that a dog has learned to sit every time the
owner says “sit” and gets a treat for doing the correct response. Say that the dog
has gotten a treat every time it has obeyed to the command “sit”, but one day does
not get a treat. The next time, it also does not get the treat either, and this
continues. The dog will eventually stop sitting down when the command is given.
But dog owners today know that dogs tend to sit down when given this command,
even if the owner sometimes fails to give the treat, and sometimes don’t.
This is called intermittent schedules of reinforcement. There are many
schedules, but two examples are fixed ratio and variable interval. Fixed ratio is
when the reinforcement to the response comes after a set amount of responses. We
can take the example of a car salesman. A car salesman knows that he will get a
bonus every time he has sold five cars. The response is car sold, and the
reinforcement happens when he has done the response five times. Variable
interval deals with a random group of intervals that have a mean and lie between
arbitrary values. Let’s take a look at the car salesman and his bonus again. The car
salesman gets a bonus every time his boss sees him selling a car. But the boss is
not always around, so the car salesman will always try to sell cars because he
never knows if the boss is suddenly paying attention to him. Intermittent
schedules of reinforcement are more rigid and may generate greater resistance to
extinction.
How behavioral problems can be understood by learning theory
While most of these learning theories are tested on animals and presented
in psychology learning books as something fairly theoretical, we can draw
parallels to human and the learning of neurotic behaviors. Anxiety which is the
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
anticipation that something dangerous is about to happen followed by tension,
rapid breathing and rapid heartbeat, can be seen as a maladaptive habit that is
learned. A person who has struggled with judgmental parents all their life, may be
afraid of doing something wrong. This person may then learn that when he/she
does something wrong criticism and maybe even punishment follows. This can
turn into anxiety about doing something wrong and in some cases obsessivecompulsive
disorder. This is a multiple-event example, but some neurotic
behaviors stem from single-events that are so traumatic to the individual that
he/she will dread the stimulus itself and become anxious when it is present. One
example of this could be a car crash where the parents of a little dies, but she
lives. The little girl may be taught to believe that cars are dangerous and become
anxious when she is put in a car later.
John Watson demonstrated how Pavlov’s classical conditioning theory
could be applied to behavioral problems such as anxiety disorders. In his famous
experiment “Little Albert” he showed how pairing loud noise with the appearance
of a white rat could make Albert afraid of the mere rat. He did it by paring the
loud noise, which is the unconditioned stimulus, with the rat, to create a
conditioned response, which was fear. This example and teachings of Pavlov
shows how the process by which people can become fearful of neutral situations
by paired associations.
Further, we can also understand operant conditioning as being the root of
maladaptive coping mechanisms. Take the example of the girl with fear of cars.
The anxiety she feels when entering a car is unpleasant in that it makes her
uneasy, her heart rate starts escalating, and breathing becomes rapid. She is
frightened. When the person driving the car sees this, it may want to take the girl
out of the car when she throws a fit in the car. The caretaker is now rewarding and
reinforcing the behavior of the girl by letting her out of the car. This is the same
when it comes to social anxiety. A person with social anxiety may escape a social
event when it starts feeling uncomfortable, or just avoid going at all. These
strategies are maladaptive and only serves to reinforce the anxiety. This is because
of the removal of an unpleasant stimulus, thereby reinforcing behavior.
To conclude this paragraph, we can see how it can be learned to become
fearful of neutral situations by paired associations and reinforced by maladaptive
coping mechanisms that award avoidance and escape. Behavioral therapists then
believed that because these responses were learned, they could be unlearned.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Training to un-learn learned behavior
Behavioral problems can become so deeply rooted in clients’ daily lives
that it interferes with work, school, and other activities. Having depressive or
anxious symptoms may first of all harm their well-being and could eventually
transcend to work life and also to relationships. Outcomes of depression and
anxiety include: withdrawal from friends, and activities, not getting things done at
work, and inability to concentrate.
To un-learn these automatic responses is key to treating behavioral
problems such as anxiety – at least according behavioral therapists. It is about rerouting
the client’s way of thinking. We can use the teachings of learning theories
to alter the ways in which people think and ultimately change behavior to include
more successful coping strategies.
Exposure therapy is widely used to treat symptoms of anxiety. Exposure
therapy is the continuous exposure to the stimulus that creates the anxiety in the
individual. If we take the little girl who is afraid of cars. Exposure therapy is
about putting the anxious individual in the situation he is afraid of and working
through the situation with the counsellor. This could be in vivo exposure, where
she is actually put in a situation where she needs to sit in a car, or just imagining
it. The idea is that exposure to the situation of which the individual is afraid of
will over time create a habituation response. Habituation is the process by which
an individual’s behavioral and sensory response diminish after repeated exposure
to the stimulus. Habituation is based on classical conditioning where once
habituation is reached, the learned fearful behavior will be extinguished. It is all
about reversing the paring of the conditioned and unconditioned stimulus. After a
while the little girl will see that nothing bad happens when she is sitting in a car,
or even when the car is moving. The counsellor is thereby re-routing the way of
thinking by putting the client through the situation and telling her that nothing bad
is going to happen.
This kind of therapy can be very overwhelming for most people as they are
literally facing their worst fear, and it could be challenging to get people to do it.
Another way to treat behavioral problems, anxiety in particular, is systematic
desensitization.
Systematic desensitization is a technique used to treat phobias and extreme
fears based on behavioral modification. The technique focuses on reducing the
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
learned link between anxiety and objects or situations that are typically fear
producing. It is based on progressive relaxation and showing the client how it
feels when muscles are relaxed. The client is here taught to first tighten then
muscle and then to relax it. This is practiced repeatedly, until the client is able to
produce and recreate this relaxing sensation without the counsellor present. When
the client has learned to relax and has felt the sensation of how a relaxed body
feels, the counsellor must pair this then with the fearful object or situation itself.
An anxiety hierarchy is created in collaboration with the client that signals
anxiety-provoking situations or stimuli arranged in order from least to most
distressing. One example of this is the fear of flying, where going through security
check may the least distressing, boarding the plane next, and further situations, all
the way to being in the plane while it is flying. Then a type of exposure therapy is
used to link the newly formed relaxation skills to the fearful situation. This could
either be in real life, but often the counsellor and the client work first with
visualization. The idea is that the client is to imagine the anxiety-provoking
scenario and then working to get to a relaxed body. One starts at the bottom of the
anxiety hierarchy by going through the least stressful situation, and then when
complete relaxation is achieved they can move on to the next stage.
There is a desensitization that happens where relaxation replaces the alarm
that goes off when encountering the anxious stimulus. The technique is founded
on the principles of classical conditioning where the client tries to replace the
panic response that occurs as a result of the stimulus with a state of relaxation.
Life is therefore a matter of training. Humans learn to fear things, they
learn behavioral patterns and to reverse these mechanisms one must train. This is
first and foremost about paring the learned fearful response with a response that
entails relaxation.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Item 3
Has this course had any effect of your understanding of organizational psychology
and your future occupational role? If no, why? If yes, why, and in which way?
The counselling course has definitely changed my view on organizational
psychology, and I believe that every working body should go through such a
course. The importance of just knowing that there may be people in the
organization that struggle from time to time, is very important. Not just because
companies can suffer from it, but because we always should aim to help people
and contribute to well-being.
It was a surprise to know that many people struggle with a variety of
problems. As we talked about in class one in five (25%) have mental problems.
According to, the Mental Health Foundation of the UK that has been gathering
mental health statistics, 1 in 6.8 people have mental health problems in the
workplace. Women are twice as likely as men to get a mental health problem
(19,8% to 10,9%).
This means that the chance that you will find these people in medium sized
organizations are fairly high. Take the example of my workplace who has 110
employees, all of them being women. Statistically this means that there are
probably around 22 people in the organization that is struggling with some type of
mental problem. The statistics have implications for companies, but also just
knowing the statistic is very important. You just never know what happens in
other peoples’ lives.
Assumptions about what is normal and what is not normal is challenged
here. I believe that if you ask a person if there is anyone in the office that has a
mental problem, or behavioral issues, like being depressed or having anxiety, that
person would not be able to pinpoint the person that does. The assumption of
normality is that usually the distribution of mental problems is bell curved.
Meaning that there are a lot more cases of mental problems than we initially
believe.
So now that we have established that there are in fact many more cases
than we might think, and that in fact many people struggle with this, why is it
important to know? I believe that it is important just to know the statistics because
we want to make it less awkward for people to step forward and tell about the
issues they have. It leads me to think about how many people may be afraid to tell
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
about these issues in risking to be fired. If we make it more normal in the society,
then maybe individuals who are struggling will be more inclined to step forward
and talk about them, and it could make the bond with their boss even stronger.
The other reason I think knowing the statistics is important is because we
need to start doing something. We cannot only be aware that some people struggle
and think that it may be hard on some employees to handle the stress in times of
bad mental health. Mental illness is not just a burden for the individual, it is a cost
for the company. Companies run the risk of cost due to presenteeism and
absenteeism. We must think forward in terms of organizational structure,
capability of healing environments and creating jobs that fit the people. But who’s
responsibility is it really? The prevention, relief, and treatment of individuals in
the workplace? Is it the individual? The company? The government? Who is in
charge of these things? This particular question has pondered me since the
beginning of the counselling class, and it still does. In the counseling class, the
focus was on treating people in the workplace, and in a workplace setting. But I
want to explore the government’s and the individual’s role in this, and also look at
workplace mental health in the bigger picture.
The government plays a big role in relief. It poses several laws and
regulations in relieving symptoms for clients. First of all, there are laws in
Norway that provide people with sick leave when they are in need of some days
off. Individuals are provided with three consecutive days off, four times during
one calendar year. The individual will get payed by the company during these
days. Also, the employee can get a doctor to sign off on a sick leave note and he
will then be able to take months of sick leave. When 16 days passes, the
government will pay the salary of the individual for the rest of the days. In
addition to providing relief for individuals in challenging situations, treatment of
mental illness is free of charge in Norway. People who are struggling with all
sorts of mental illness, whether it is depression, anxiety, or a personality disorder
you are offered treatment with a professional. This is why Norway is called a
welfare state. You are offered treatment, and relief, and you will still be receiving
a salary for the days you miss work.
But the problem may be that this person does not want to take some days
off, they may be stressed at work and feel like they can’t just take a few days off.
People are frequently going to work even when they are having problems. And
the workplace may be fostering an environment that keeps the individual down.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
One example of this is problems related to drug and alcohol abuse. In businesses
where people are expected to go out for lunch or dinner with clients it may be
difficult to escape the abuse, because the environment reinforces the behavior.
Another example is when someone is stressed at work because of the many
assignments that he or she has to complete. If this person is feeling anxious,
depressed or overwhelmed, the added stress of the work can become so intrusive.
It can leave the employee not able to complete his or her job assignments.
In a cost perspective it can be dangerous to have employees that have
problems. Absenteeism is a both a cost in the sense that the company has to pay
for the sick leave, and the added cost of completing the individuals work. There
may have to a temp completing the persons job, or someone within the company
has to spend extra time to complete the work. Presenteeism is also a problem
when it comes to mental illness at work. This term comes into play when people
are coming to work, but they may not be effective, and may not even be present in
their minds to work. According to Mental Health Foundation UK, companies in
the UK can save up to 8 billion pounds per year with better mental health support
in the workplace.
A study from 2011 found that introducing a workplace intervention and
care management for those living with and at risk of depression would save a
company of 500 people 83,278 pounds over a two-year period (Knapp, McDaid,
& Parsonage, 2011). This was done by introducing an employee screening
program for all employees with an estimated cost of 30,90 pounds per employee.
If the employee was living with or at risk of mental illness the problem could be
managed by a care program for 240 pounds per employee. The same study found
that promoting well-being at work with personalized information and advice, a
risk-assessment questionnaire, seminars, workshops, and web-based materials
could save a 500 people company 347,722 pounds over a two-year period. This
would of course only be successful if there is an initial investment in such
programs (Knapp, McDaid, & Parsonage, 2011).
So, is it almost expected that a company or business invest in programs or
outside counselling services? From the research it is clear that it saves the
company a lot of costs. But what about the small companies? Start-ups that have
2-20 people with limited funds? Should we expect these companies to invest in
mental health care? And how does this relate to Norway, and its position as a
welfare state? Should the Norwegian government introduce services to companies
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
in order for such programs to be set in motion in smaller companies who are
missing the capital? The cost for each employee in the example of Knapp,
McDaid, and Parsonage’s study (2011), the cost for a full program is 80 pounds,
which is 870 kr. That is a big cost. But I wonder if such an initiative would serve
the public well. Consider the current situation in Norway where there is a lack of
psychologists. Initiating such a program may cause some people to not need a
psychologist outside work. It could lead to a decrease in people needing help form
government funded psychologists and sick leaves. This is of course only a thought
experiment and a lot more complicated in practice. But what would happen if the
welfare state of Norway started introducing laws and regulations that force
companies to start evaluating the mental health of their employees?
Now let’s talk about millennials. Millennials are the generational cohort
that is born between the early 1980’s and the mid 1990’s. This generation is just
about to start their first full-time jobs after ending their education. They differ
from earlier generations in their working habits, their expectations but also in their
mental health. Millennials are generally at higher risk for mental health issues.
According to Curran and Hill (2017), there is an increase in mental health issues
when looking at millennials versus the generation before. In their study, Curran
and Hill (2017) studied perfectionism and the increase in this in millennials. They
found that mental health issues and perfectionism had risen among millennials.
Millennials have a higher pressure to perform, and this leads to wanting to be
perfect. When they do not achieve they becomes anxious and depressed.
Another study of narcissism concluded that millennials have higher rates
of narcissism, which could serve as a cause of problems in the workplace
(SYZYGY, 2016). They found that millennials exhibited 16% more narcissism
than other generations. This finding is attributed to entitlement that millennials are
often prescribed.
So how do we deal with these young professionals entering organizations
that are not ready to deal with these mental health issues. How does an
organization prepare for this? And should society and the government have more
control in dealing with this? I apologize for I have no answer. Hopefully, someone
in the future will.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10
Reference list
Colledge, Ray. (2002). Mastering Counselling Theory. New York: Palgrave.
Curran, T., & Hill, A. P. (2017). Perfectionism Is Increasing Over Time: A Meta-
Analysis of Birth Cohort Differences From 1989 to 2016.
Knapp, M., McDaid, D., & Parsonage, M. (2011). Mental Health Promotion and
Mental Illness Prevention: The Economic Case.
Littlejohn, S. W., & Foss, K. A. (2009). Encyclopedia of communication
theory (Vol. 1). Sage.
Watzlawick, P., Bavelas, J.B. & Jackson, D.D. (1967) ”Pragmatics of human
communication: A study of interactional patterns, pathologies, and
paradoxes.” New York: W.W.Norton & Co.
Digital sources:
https://syzygyny.app.box.com/s/ipepbbhydi1pev18qcow5k50tt3bq0k5: SYZYGY.
October 2016. Retrived: May, 28, 2018.
GRA 22371 1000208
No. 10