BI Norwegian Business School - campus Oslo
GRA 22371
Counselling
Component of continuous assessment: Term paper
Term paper – Counts 70% of total grade
Counselling Exam
ID number: 0999026
Start: 20.04.2018 09.00
Finish: 08.06.2018 12.00
No. 13
ID number: 0999026
Term Paper
- Counselling-
Hand-in date:
08.06.2018
Campus:
BI Oslo
Examination code and name:
GRA 22371 Counselling
Programme:
Master of Science in Leadership and Organizational Psychology
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
i
Content
CONTENT ........................................................................................................................................ I
SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................... II
QUESTION 2. ................................................................................................................................. 1
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL APPROACHES ................................................................................. 1
THE OTHER SIDE: CARL ROGERS ................................................................................................... 4
CONCLUSION................................................................................................................................. 5
QUESTION 3 .................................................................................................................................. 6
QUESTION 4 – CASE I (ROGER’S CASE) .............................................................................. 11
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................. 11
WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVE COURSE OF ACTIONS .................................................................... 13
CONCLUSION............................................................................................................................... 15
REFERENCES: ............................................................................................................................ 16
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
ii
Summary
In this article I will discuss three questions behind the counselling topic. Initially,
I will be discussing the extent of training and how behavioral problems might be
diagnosed and treated in terms of learning mechanisms. In this session there will
be a higher focus on works related to cognitive and behavioral theories, on class
discussion regarding sympathetic nervous system and how to adapt to the
reactions our body will have when we are in a situation that we feel
uncomfortable, and the work of Carl Rogers. Secondly, I will discuss the effect
that this class has had in my understanding of organizational psychology and in
my future role as an employer, possibly in this area. I will bring attention to some
aspects of the class and about my reflections on some topics. Lastly, there will be
an evaluation of case I about Roger, a 34 years old sales manager. This session
will include an analysis of possible scenarios and a set of possible courses of
actions to follow after the client suggested initiating a business partnership with
the counsellor.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
1
2 – To which extent is life a matter of training? Discuss how behavioral
problems related to performance, well-being and relationships can be
diagnosed and treated in terms of learning mechanisms.
Cognitive and Behavioral approaches
Cognitive therapy suggests that “the way in which people interpret their
experiences determines how they feel and act” (Colledge, 2002, pg. 171). Still
according to Ray Colledge (2002) counsellors following this approach will be
very informational oriented. Based on an assumption that clients learned incorrect
processing and interpreting habits while developing their cognitive skills,
counsellors will focus their attention on trying to correct erroneous thinking and
distortions, while helping the client to learn more realistic ways of thinking. In
this line of therapy, training is seen as very important for improvement of clients.
In general, the cognitive approach has an empirical orientation, very focused on
questioning to diagnose and to support learning.
Aaron Beck’s work from early 60’s lead to the development of the cognitive
therapy approach. He suggested that people had unique learning mechanisms
giving meaning to earlier experiences in quite a different way, varying from
individual to individual. Therefore, he believed that many behavioral problems
related that could affect an individual well-being, or his/her relationships for
instance could be seen based on past events. In this scenario, transference would
play a big role. One example that can be seen from a perspective on a learning
mechanism and would be explained through the lens of transference would be
individuals who act in their marriage in the same way that they saw their parents
doing. Therefore, they learned based on the experience they had and transferred
the actions to their own relationships. If the parents of this person had a violent
relationship for instance, in this setting, the individual would also act with
violence in his/her marriage. As a result, as the counsellor questions about the past
of the person, he/she will be able to diagnose that the client has this behavioral
problem in their relationship based on how he/she interpret and made sense of the
violent marriage his/her parents had.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
2
One important technique to treat clients within cognitive therapy that brings much
attention to learning mechanisms is the called reality testing and correcting
automatic thoughts. There are many different ways of doing this. Two interesting
ways that are related to learning mechanisms are the Socratic questioning and the
identification of cognitive errors. In the first one, questions are made with the
objective of making the client realize their thoughts, examine it for distortions,
and substitute these thoughts with healthier thoughts while developing a new
pattern of thoughts. Examples of questions that the counsellor will provoke the
client to reflect on can be: “what is the logic?”, “What evidence is there to support
my interpretation?”, and “What can you learn from this experience?” (Colledge,
2002). The second mentioned way to do reality testing and correction of automatic
thoughts is identifying cognitive errors. In this approach clients will learn about
cognitive errors and be challenged to identify their errors based on a three aspect
table: find out what provoked negative emotions and describe it, also describe
their automatic thoughts, and the types of errors in these thoughts. These are some
examples supporting the high involvement of learning mechanisms in the
cognitive therapy approach, because of that, this approach has high focus on
training and believe that it can be very important for the development of the client.
From behavioral theory we found more support to training as a very important
aspect of life, this line of thinking suggest that humans have two main forces:
biological, such as hunger and sex drive, and the learning history of the
individual. The work of John Watson is one of the predecessors of the
behaviorism field. For psychologists and counsellors following his work “all
psychological problems and solutions can be schematized in terms of stimuli and
responses” (Colledge, 2002, pg. 191). The main methods of treatment under the
behavioral approach involves training. Examples are training relaxation
techniques, that involves training deep muscular relaxation, assertive training, or
behavioral rehearsal for instance. In this last one, clients’ deficits in skills such as
active listening, provide feedback, and self-disclosure are addressed through
rehearsal. Further, the client will be encouraged to rehearse his/her behaviors
through assessment and analysis of the areas causing difficulties. In addition, the
client will use role-play to practice appropriate responses, and will move until
training these behaviors in real settings among other steps. Behavioral theory also
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
3
supports the high importance of training in life and how much we can improve
using learning mechanisms.
To shine line in the importance given to training in the cognitive and behavioral
approaches, I bring attention to Meichenbaum (1986) work where he proposed
guidelines to developing a training program. Initially, the counsellor diagnoses the
difficulties faced by the client by identifying component processes and capacity
requirements. Then, the counsellor assesses for the client’s existing strategies, by
learning his behavioral competences and automatic thoughts and feelings that
could harm the client’s performance. According to Meichenbaum counsellor and
client collaborate to develop a training program. Further, the training tasks are
carefully selected. The guidelines go own up to ten topics which include topics
such as making sure that the clients recognize feedback, training in multiple
settings, and making the termination performance-based and not time-based.
These arguments suggest a strong focus on learning mechanisms and on training
for diagnose and treatment of behavioral problems connected to performance,
well-being, and relationships.
I have discussed briefly two branches of psychology that tend to believe in
training as a fundamental aspect to diagnose and treatment of behavioral
problems. Our discussion in class about the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems provides support to this approach. We discussed how the
sympathetic nervous system is activated when we become scared. From there, a
successive course of actions will follow including dilatation of pupils, inhibition
of salivation, acceleration of heartbeats, dilatation of bronchi among other
reactions. For a performance who has his/her performance harmed by speaking in
public for instance, this difficulty can be explained by the activation of the
sympathetic system.
As it was showed to us in class, as a person who already is nervous about a
presentation in front of class, stands to walk towards the front of the classroom,
his/her heart already accelerates. This reaction might be followed by difficulties to
breath for instance caused by the dilatation of the bronchi. Therefore, the
individual can diagnose some of the problems behind his/her poor performance in
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
4
presentations through learning of how his/her body responds to that situation.
After interpreting how the person’s body react, the individual can train to master
the situation, to control it, instead of letting the anxiety take over. Moreover,
people can practice what would made the situation uncomfortable in advance and
develop a better reaction to the activity of the sympathetic nervous system which
will occur anyways.
The other side: Carl Rogers
So far, the arguments have defended that most behavioral problems that affect an
individual performance, well-being, and his/her relationships are diagnosed and
treated based on learning mechanisms, this suggests that through training,
individuals can accomplish almost everything. At least, people can learn to be
adapt to situations where they previously could not. However, Carl Rogers
provides a challenging point to the learning orientation methods and to treatment
based on learning mechanisms. In his book On Becoming a Person (1961) he
discusses his research and points out that independent of the technique used
clients reported similar changes in themselves. However, he adds that a certain
learning-oriented technique proved to be the least effective type of therapy.
It seems counterintuitive that a learning-oriented technique would be the least
effective one, however, as Carl Rogers suggested, this technique consisted of
three elements: first, the counsellor would emphasize and label behaviors that
have proved to be unsatisfying, secondly, the counsellor would intend to
understand the reasons behind these behaviors. The counsellor would explore
objectively with the client these reasons in an attempt to diagnose through
learning mechanisms what would be causing the undesired behavior. The last
element would consist of helping the client to more effectively solve problems,
this means, the counsellor would re-educate the client to establish more effective
habits. According to Carl Rogers, the problem was that this technique aimed to be
impersonal. As he stated, “this seems the most likely cue to the failure of this
approach.” (Rogers, 1961, pg. 47).
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
5
Further, Carl Rogers claims that the reasons pointed by clients for their
improvement were: the trust felt in the therapist, feeling understood by the
therapist, feeling that they were independent to make their choices and decisions,
and that the therapist had openly talked about the problems disturbing the clients.
Further, Rogers suggests that a research found support that there are three aspects
that need to present for the success of the therapy: the counsellor has to be
empathic towards the client, understandable towards his feelings and suffering.
Secondly, the counsellor also needs to be unconditionally positive which means
that the client should not criticize the client, instead, make him feel safe and that
the therapist accepts him/her as he/she is. Finally, that there needs to be a
congruence, this means that the counsellor should not pretend be someone who
he/she is not. The therapist should be himself/herself and be honest with the
client.
These arguments by Carl Rogers suggest that treating patients based on learning
mechanisms may not be the best approach to follow, at least in certain conditions.
In fact, he claims in his book that he gradually understood that he could not be of
help to a “troubled person by means of any intellectual or training procedure”
(Rogers, 1961, pg. 32). If the client does not feel that the counselor accepts and
understands his/her feelings and thoughts which are so disturbing to the client, the
person will not feel free to explore all these deep hurting thoughts that might be
leading to the behavioral problems presented. Further, clients need this freedom in
the relationship to be able to improve. These conditions may not be met in
learning-oriented approaches.
Conclusion
London (2002) suggests that many organizations have been hiring coaches
nowadays to help better develop their top leaders. Coaching is defined by Stone
(1999) as the process by which employees gain skills, abilities, and knowledge
that will help them develop in their positions and be more effective in their jobs.
According to London (2002), 55-70% of the clients report benefits coming from
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
6
coaching. This supports the importance of training to the development of an
individual.
As mentioned before, according to Beck we have unique learning mechanisms. I
have been an athlete most of my life, and from my experiences I believe that most
things in life can be in a huge extent improved as a result of training. However,
what we have studied on the work of Carl Rogers has made me reflect very much
about how learning-oriented techniques may not be successful in treating
individuals who have behavioral problems, especially those affecting his/her wellbeing
and relationships. This does not mean that he suggested that training was
not important, but that learning-oriented techniques that failed to take in
consideration the individual would tend to fail. In my life I have always thought
about the importance of relationships and connections with people, and I believe
that without the points stated by Carl Rogers (empathy, unconditional positive
support, and congruence), the training focused approaches and the treatments
based on learning mechanisms will have a much lower chance of being successful
in treating behavioral problems. This means that based on my reflections based on
the class and lectures (considering my limited knowledge), I consider Carl Rogers
elements more important than learning mechanisms to treating problems.
3 - Has this course had any effect of your understanding of organizational
psychology and your future occupational role? If no, why? If yes, why and in
which way?
Despite experiencing mental illness in my family, I have never realized how much
it affects people around me. This class has opened my eyes to some aspects of
organizational psychology that can be very positive for my future occupational
role, independent of in which area I will be working on. Therefore, to already
answer the question, this class has had an effect on my understanding of
organizational psychology and on my future occupational role. I am sure people
have processed and experienced the same information in different ways, but I
believe that the most important thing to me was to start reflecting on how I could
better help those around me who are undergoing challenging times in their life and
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
7
the importance of establishing a trustworthy and positive relationship with those
we intend to help.
From the first day of class I already started thinking about how little attention we
still give to mental health or illness. One of the first questions in class was about
how many people, who would be mentally ill, we would meet from the point we
would leave classroom until we would leave school or even how many were
mentally ill in our class. At first, we were told about the first serious attempt to
investigate how many people were mentally ill. It has happened in 1947 and
psychologists estimated a total of 15%. This attempt was motivated by the fact
that mental illness was a great source of economic loss. Further, general
practioners disagreed with those numbers, suggesting it to be an exaggeration.
Then, they were motivated to keep records of people who would come to their
offices that could be mentally ill. Results were even more surprising for them:
20%. This already called my attention and made me reflect about how many
people actually needed help for mental issues.
Further, it was presented to us a study from Alv A. Dahl et al., 1995 suggesting
that 19.1% of people in the survey experienced some kind of psychological
disorder. This study indicates that approximately 20% of people undergo some
kind of mental illness. From this point I already started reflecting on how many
people around me might be undergoing some psychological disorder and I do not
even know about it. Further, it called my attention that the article was from 1995
which was in the early days of internet. Despite the lack of a new research to
support my thought, it quickly came to my mind that this number cannot be valid
nowadays. I understand the importance of research to support opinions, but at the
end of the day it is our reflections, how we interpret the information we receive,
and our experiences that shape our thoughts. Therefore, I believe that with the
development of the internet and social medias the times we live in today are very
different (as in more challenging) than how it was in 1995 in regard to
psychological disturbances for people. As a result, I believe that this number
could in fact be somewhere between 30-40% of people.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
8
The format of the class and the emphasis on reflecting towards what is important
to us has proved to be great for me. I believe that this class was very interesting
and helped me to focus my attention on those things that I thought were going to
help me develop as a person and as a future professional. The possibility of
assessing practical stories and of discussing what different people had seen from
the information received in the previous day was interesting to understand how we
process same information in different ways. As a consultant or in an HR position I
might be responsible for developing employees or dealing with conflicts between
them and I will need to be aware that individuals have a “unique learning
mechanism” as Aaron Beck suggests and try to understand each individual based
on his/her own needs and feelings.
Further, as the person who studied organizational psychology I will tend to be the
first one managers or coworkers will look for in the case of a problem with a
subordinate or a colleague. Therefore, this class has opened my eyes for the
responsibility involved in organizational psychology. From my understanding,
organizational psychology involves realizing that there will be people facing
psychological challenges and it is our responsibility to take it seriously. This is
more normal than we usually think, and this class showed me that we need to be
attentive also to underlying feelings that might be causing an individual to present
behavioral problems. The discussion regarding “Tom’s” problems that came to
surface during the company merger or about the air traffic controller who could
not sleep were helpful to improve my understanding that employees’ problems
might need different approaches and I have to be ready to provide the appropriate
help or to recommend them to an actual therapist who can provide the necessary
assistance.
In addition, it was also proposed in class that counseling and coaching are strands
of psychology. As these two areas have gained more and more space in
organizations nowadays it has reminded me of the importance of psychology in
organizations. London (2002) talks about how there might be around 10000
coaches worldwide, therefore, psychology is very much present in organizations
nowadays. Further, according to Schein (2006) the consultant or the coach needs
to establish who is the one he is to be loyal to. There needs to be a decision from
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
9
start to whether he is the individual coach, or he is the organization coach. This is
an important aspect of the ethics involved behind this that I have not thought
about before. This means that if an employee comes for help in the future I will
need to be clear to whom I am going to be a helper for.
Learning counselling skills and techniques and that an individual can help people
by having good counseling skills despite not being a professional counsellor or
helping without being a certified psychologist has also called my attention. This
will have a positive effect in my future role independent of the field in which I
will work on. Further, I believe this can also be positive for my personal
relationships and in helping friends who may be undergoing some difficult times.
Carl Rogers’ contributions are the ones that called my attention the most.
In his book On Becaming a Person (1961) Carl Rogers suggest that “the
therapeutic relationship is only one instance of interpersonal relations, and that the
same lawfulness governs all such relationships” (Carl Rogers, 1961, pg. 37).
Rogers findings suggested that there were similarities in what clients considered
helpful in therapy. These were: the trust in the relationship with the therapist, the
feeling that they were understood by their therapist, feeling independent to make
their choices, and the clarity of the therapist in speaking about feelings which the
client was harmful and hesitant in discussing. From there, Carl Rogers suggested
that it is not about using a certain technique. Instead, it is about being empathic
with the client, being understandable with the problem presented. Secondly,
therapists should be able to provide unconditional positive regard to the client.
This means that therapists should not criticize the client, should try showing that
comprehends the difficulty of the situation in hand and so on. Finally, it is about
congruence, about being who they are. Therapists should not try to be someone
else with the patient, they should be honest and genuine.
These aspects of psychotherapy involved in Carl Rogers studies have made me
reflect on how I can try to help people close to me and the importance of building
a good relationship with those looking for help. As Rogers suggests, the same
lawfulness involved in the therapeutic relationships also governs all relationships.
This means that if I use Rogers approaches to help employees in my organization
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
10
or even in my personal life, I might be able to help them improve their condition.
As I am not a certified counsellor, I could be what Jones (2016) calls a helper,
which is someone who is not a professional but has some counselling skills and
might intend to help individuals in a more informal, with less clear boundaries
than an actual counsellor-client relationship. In this moment of my life, this class
has helped me to pay attention on how at times I tend to try to give advices to
friends and this might not be what they need to improve. Since this class I have
been trying to approach people in a more positive way while at the same time
being myself. This has been an important reflection that I took from this class that
I hope I will apply in a future role in an organization as well.
In addition, Carl Rogers suggest that he used to think about how he could treat a
person or how he could change the person as opposed to his later thought of “how
can I provide a relationship which this person can use for his/her own personal
growth?” (p.32). This class has helped me see that independent of being a
therapist, counselor, or coach, in my future role in an organizational if I
experience a situation where I see a colleague or it is brought to my attention that
someone is struggle I will do my best to provide a relationship that can help the
person to grow on their own, to be free to realize the changes needed in his/her
life.
This class has had an important effect on how I see organizational psychology,
and in how I approach people in my life who might be needing some guidance or
help. The reflections behind will hopefully positively impact my future role in an
organization independent of what I end up doing. Further, the format of the class
was very positive towards learning and towards helping us to leave our comfort
zone and speak up when we thought we should give an insight or an opinion about
any subject. Interestingly, after this class I am absolutely sure that there will be
people in the class who will feel differently than me and maybe not be satisfied
with the format of the class. There were so many interesting theories that I would
like to know more about such as those from Freud, Carl Rogers, Melanie Klein,
Aaron Beck, and Fritz Perls among many others.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
11
Question 4 – Case I (Roger’s case)
This case presents Roger, a 34 years old man who has achieved great success as a
sales manager in financial savings products and was able to make a lot of money
during his reasonably short career. However, Roger has become a workaholic, and
this has affected his personal relations. He is currently undergoing his second
divorce and he has difficulties trying to deal with 4 children with 3 different
women. Roger has looked for me to work on his personal issues as he pretends to
become a good father to his kids. Despite volunteering as a parent coach for the
football team, he has already been called on for not showing up for a few
practices. After three sessions with Roger he has invited me to join him in a party
where some important investors will be to discuss a possible business opportunity.
Situational Analysis
Roger is a successful business man; however, he seems to be struggling in his
personal life. Going through his second divorce and having to cope with 4
children with 3 different women might have made him realize that he needed to
improve his relationships in his personal life. As after three sessions Roger is
appreciative of the insights to his personal life and relational insights it seems
reasonable to suggest that I am using a person-centered approach with him. In this
approach, the counsellor will attempt to be empathic with the client, show
unconditional positive support, and will not try to deceive the client or be
someone who he is not (Colledge, 2002). This approach from Rogerian
counsellors is important to establish a relationship based on trust.
One possible scenario is that Roger is a person who tries to please everyone,
despite intending to give more time to his personal life he keeps falling back to
old patterns and skipping the football session to prioritize work. Seeing from a
gestalt theory approach he might be thinking that this is who he should be, and
possibly, if being a low-functioning person he lets the “you should” affect who he
really is. As a sales manager he might not feel like he is free to make his choices
and feel stuck in his relationships with his work environment. Still following
gestalt theory, according to Colledge (2002) counsellors should work to increase
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
12
the clients’ sense of freedom and “response ability” (p.93). If this is the case, it is
important to help Roger understand that he is owner of his own self.
Edgar Schein (2006) discusses the similarities of consulting and coaching. Despite
this case being through a counselling lens, it is possible to see from a coaching
perspective as well. Schein stresses the importance of building relationship first in
order to be able to better help in situations where the contact is initiated by the
individual looking for a personal help. It seems that this has been happening so far
in the counselling sessions that have happened.
Another way of trying to understand the situation and what is causing Roger to
behave this way comes from cognitive theory and the ideas of Aaron Beck. Beck
believed that among many reasons from development of personality disorders is
by transferring strategies that were used by parents and applying to their life. In
this scenario, we could suggest that Roger had a father or a mother who would put
much emphasizes into being successful in his job, or he had a father who was not
very present and was always working. Further, he could have parents who were
not faithful in their relationships and/or divorced parents who remarried many
times. These possible scenarios from his childhood might be affecting the way he
behaves in his relationships. It is important to dig deeper into Roger’s life to
understand what might be causing him to behave this way.
These conditions might have created automatic thoughts, which “reflect schema
contents or deeper beliefs and assumptions” (Colledge, 2002, pg. 172), that cause
him to fall into the same pattern of behavior for believing that it is important to
have a successful job and make money, maintaining the position even when it
causes him to be away from his family. This kind of thought might be influenced
by values imposed by other’s and not necessarily on the individuals own values.
Carl Rogers called this “conditions of worth.” Further, he added that we all
internalize conditions of worth, however, some more than others. Carl Rogers
cites two possible conditions of worth that could be highly affecting Roger in this
case: “making money is important and you are a failure if you do not do it” and
“achievement is vital and you are a failure if do not succeed” (Colledge, 2002, pg.
78).
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
13
What are the alternative course of actions
The reason for the meetings were to help Roger to improve in his personal life, at
this point I am acting as his counsellor. One possible course of action would be to
accept his offer, go to the party, and possibly initiate the business becoming a
personal developer for the new organization. In this way, the relationship
established could absolutely change. As the business would be created I would
become Roger’s business partner and personal developer for the organization.
Maybe becoming a group coach and owing my services to the organization and
not to Roger anymore. This course of action would not be positive as it would be
harming a very important point of counselling which is the clarity of the role to
facilitate help.
Jones (2016) stresses the importance of the role played by the counsellor in being
able to help the client. He claims that one difference between a more informal
help from people with counselling skills and the more counselling relations is in
regard to the clear boundaries structured around the relationships. As mentioned
in class one important thing distinguishing friends, relatives,
boyfriends/girlfriend’s relationships with a person undergoing psychological
problems from the counsellors’ relationship with this person lies in the clarity of
the role. If I fail to maintain this separation I will possibly not be able to help
Roger to become a better father to his children. Further, becoming business
partner with Roger would signify that I could no longer be his counsellor and the
previous sessions where some of the person-centered approach technique used had
already generated positive results in the establishment of a trustworthy counsellorclient
relationship would have been for nothing.
As we discussed in class, conversations are like games that contain certain rules.
The game of counsellor-client relationship does not have room for business
involvement other than the agreed exchange involved in the hiring of the
counsellor service. In cheating on the rules individuals may disappoint the other
side as the game is now being modified and the previous agreement is no longer
available. Roger would no longer be able to disclosure important information to
me that could be very positive for his improvement.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
14
Therefore, I will discuss a couple of techniques that could be used in further
developing the relationship with Roger after denying his offer to partner up and
open a business together. I would respectfully explain to him the reasons why I
denied his offer and keep on building the relationship. One of the main focus of
gestalt counselling is in creating awareness (Colledge, 2002). Following this
approach, I would focus on helping Roger to build awareness of his current status.
Further, the development of his inner strength to allow him to become
independent of the working environment he can possibly be stuck is going to be
an important aspect for his future development. This could help him to identify
when he relates well or badly with others and initiate the way towards a personal
maturation.
In the awareness technique, I would attempt to explore Roger’s timely sensations,
feelings, images among others with questions such as “What are you aware of?”
and “What did you feel when you said that?” This would be targeted to increase
his awareness of his own feeling and emotions, and maybe make him understand
how his lack of good relationship with children and wives is affecting him and
create conditions for him to initiate the changes by himself.
Another course of action would be to follow a cognitive therapy approach with
Roger to help him understand cognitive distortions he may be having. Maybe
through Socratic questioning I can provoke Roger to question himself what he is
gaining from skipping the football game, or what have you got to lose if you fail
to be more present in the life of your children? Or even What is the worst thing
that can happen if you do not change your behavior? This line of questioning
could help Roger to understand what is at stake for him and maybe help him to
initiate a process of change in his life.
Lastly, as I previously suggested it seems reasonable that the counselling sessions
so far have been focusing on building a relationship and have been based on a
person-centered approach in being empathic, understandable with Roger. Also
showing him unconditional positive regard, and by being myself and honest with
him. The course of action in this case would be to continue with this approach and
try to create conditions for him to find the best way to help himself to become a
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
15
better father. Further, keep being empathic, understandable and positive towards
his experiences and feelings would be fundamental in developing his selfconfidence
that he can become better in dealing with his children and in his
personal relations in general. Conditions for self-actualization such as personal
responsibility, capacity for good personal relations, and ethical living would play
a big role in this scenario. One important aspect would be to attempt to drive him
away from preoccupation with maintaining appearances or towards valuing his
growth moment, and towards a desire for stronger relationships that he can cherish
and greater intimacy with his family (Colledge, 2002).
Conclusion
From a Rogerian perspective it is very important to explore with the client the
deep feelings and thoughts that might be harming him/her and talk about it in an
open way. I believe in this case that the most appropriate approach would be to
dig deeper on his life and trying to understand why he might be behaving this
way, being supportive and understandable to what Roger says and try to help him
see that he is free to make his choices and if he want to become a better father he
is capable and has the freedom to behaving in a way that will help him achieve
this personal improvement.
In regard to Roger’s offer to become business partner does not seem to be the best
alternative to accept it. It is fundamental to maintain the clear structure of the
“game” counsellor-client to be able to help him to improve his relationships with
his family. Therefore, I should maintain my role as his counsellor, otherwise, I
will probably not be able to help him. Jones (2016) suggests overlaps between
coaching and counselling, and following what Edgar Schein (2006) proposes, it is
very different to coach an individual than it is to coach for an organization. My
responsibility as a counsellor would no longer be towards Roger, instead it would
be towards our newly established organization. As I intend to help Roger
individually, I would proceed with a course of action that would allow as to
maintain our roles and further on help him to improve in the areas he hoped to
improve.
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13
16
References:
Alv A. Dahl & al. (1995). Lærebok i psykiatri.
Colledge, R. (2002). Mastering Counselling Theory. New York: Palgrave
London, M. (2002) Leadership development: Paths to self-insight and
professional growth. Mahwah,
N. J.: Lawrence Earlbaum
Meichenbaum, D. (1986). Cognitive behavior modification. In F. H. Kanfer & A.
P. Goldstein (Eds.), Helping people change: A textbook of methods (3rd ed., pp.
346-380). New York: Pergamon Press.
Nelson-Jones, R. (2016) Basic Counselling Skills. London: Sage
Rogers, C.R. (1961). On Becoming a Person. New York: Houghton Mifflin
Company
Schein, E. H. (2006). Coaching and consultations revisited: Are they the same? In
M. Goldsmith & L. Lyons (Eds.), Coaching for leadership (2 ed., pp. 17-
25). San Francisco: Wiley
Stone, F.M. (1999) Coaching, counseling & mentoring. New York: AMACOM
GRA 22371 0999026
No. 13